# Investigating drug usage across European countries as a factor of age and GDP using wastewater metabolite data (Last Updated: Dec. 6, 2021)
Trevor Pettit (tpettit3@uwo.ca, he/him), Scout Thompson, Peter Baker, and Jake Simanek 

## This is a repository for our UWO Biology 9915 term project on an analysis of European drug usage by country, as a function of both the number of 'youth' (aged 15 to 24) and the relative wealth (GDP, 2011 USD) of the respective country. 

## An itemized list of the contents of this repository:
1. **Archived materials**: working drafts of project files included in previous commits. 'Fork' repository (instructions available from: https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/quickstart/fork-a-repo) and see project history for more information.
2. **Data**: folder including source data .csv files, consistent with original source data cited in project metadata and .html file section 'Appendix A'. See note on data and organization of project files below for more information.
3. **Presentation materials**: a copy of project in-class presentation, given December 6, 2021. This presentation was designed to fit approximately 35 minutes of content, and to allow for approximately 10 minutes of questions. Note that interactive elements were designed to be a part of this presentation; 'GitHub' and 'Naloxone' demonstrations were organized in-tandem with this presentation.
4. **Supplementary materials**: separate .csv copies of the project metadata and project packages, as included in the .html file sections 'Appendix A' and 'Appendix D', respectively.
5. **.gitignore**: default list of settings of project files to be 'left out' of project repository. This list does not include any files necessary, relevant, or related to the project data and analysis, but rather things like cache. The purpose of this is to limit the size of the repository and to maximize utility. 
6. **European-drug-usage_2011-2020.Rproj**: this R project file initializes the project directory on the local computer of a user following a new 'fork'. For more information on how to access these types of files, see the notes below on using the project .html and .RMD files. 
7. **Investigating drug usage across Europe.Rmd**: this RMD file contains background information, methods, code, outputs, and interpretation corresponding to the analysis outlined in the project. For more information on how to use this .RMD file, see the note on 'forking' an .RMD file below. We suggest that this file type is best suited to regular R users.
8. **Investigating drug usage across Europe.html**: this .html file presents a fully knitted version of the same background information, methods, code, outputs, and interpretation presented in the corresponding .RMD file. For more information on how to use this .html file, see the note on saving .html files from GitHub below (italics). We suggest that this file type is best suited to new R users, or even those who do not have R installed.
9. **README.md**: the present file; background information on the project and instructions on how to use the project repository. 

### A note on the context of this project:
This project was completed as a part of a Graduate-level statistics course. The 'objective' of the assignment was to use data found online to demonstrate an analysis using a linear-model or ANOVA. For more information, see the course syllabus: https://www.uwo.ca/biology/pdf/graduate/2021-2022%20Course%20Outlines/2021_Biology_9915A_Syllabus.pdf. 

### A note on the data used in this project:
Data for this project were collected from publically available online sources in October, 2021. The 'drug usage' data (weekday mean, given in mg/1000 people/day) used in this project are made available courtesy of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction (EMCDDA): https://www.emcdda.europa.eu/publications/html/pods/waste-water-analysis_en#source-data. The 'PctYouth' data (precentage of the population accounted for by youths aged 15-24, given as a proportion) are available from a 2019 report published by the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, avaialable online: https://population.un.org/wpp/Download/Standard/Population/. The 'GDP' data (GDP by country, given in 2011 USD currency) used in this project are available from the World Bank website: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD?fbclid=IwAR3tVOmvWo6ijRcavhXuUEhoDZgkVFE4DeiD1CtiZDYYiqpVk8sj0kSxxIY. Copies of the source data .csv files are available as a part of this project in the 'scripts' folder. The 'drug usage', 'PctYouth', and 'GDP' data are organized into subfolders of the same name. Note that because the 'drug usage data' includes 50 files (corresponding to each combination of reference drug type and reference year), the 'drug usage' subfolder is further organized into subfolders by reference year. 

For more information on the data used in this project and the variables constructed for analysis from these data, please see the project .html file, located in the central project folder. Regarding data utility, there are three sections of particular note in this document: *Section 2* of the project document provides operational definitions of terms used in our project, *Section 3* of the document provides additional detail on data acquisition, and *Appendix A* details the project metadata. These sections are linked in the project document by a floating Table of Contents that can be used to navigate the document, found on the left hand side of the screen. 

### A note on the organization of the project directory:
Files in this directory are organized in a project folder through a series of subfolders, which contain the project files, scripts, and data. To utilize the code included in this project as intended, it is important to maintain the integrity of these directories so that data can be read into the script. The following linked forum thread provides some usefull troubleshooting tips for project users that are having difficulties navigating or utilizing the project folder and subfolders: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/24577084/forking-a-sub-directory-of-a-repository-on-github-and-making-it-part-of-my-own-r.

### A note on the organization of project files:
As a part of this repository, input data files, script files, and the ouput .html file are all made available. The most accessible of these files is the output .html file, because the data and code has alreadby been knit into this environment; accordingly, even those without R Studio (or R at all) can simply download the .html file from this repository and still see our code (as toggled by a button shown in the .html document), the corresponding outputs, and our plain-text explanations and interpretations. A written explanation of how to do this is provided in italics in the paragraph below, as an online example could not be found.

### A note on accessing the project .html file:
*To download the .html document from this repository, first simply navigate to the repository home page (https://github.com/trevor-lyman/European-drug-usage_2011-2020). Under the 'Code' tab, all files and subfolders located within the main project directory can be seen in a single pane. The .html analysis file is located in the main project directory, and thus should be visible in this pane ("update-name.html"). Click on the file name (formatted as a link), but make sure you are selecting the right file, as there are both .RMD and .html project files with matching names. On the file page, click the 'Download' button; this will bring up a new browser tab filled with .html code (that is not being read yet). Right-click (Mac users: two-finger click) on a blank area of the page and select 'Save As...'; this will bring up a dialog box that will allow you to download (and re-name) the .html document as you like. If you now navigate to the directory on your local computer where this file is saved and select it, a new browser window will open with the .html document (with the code being properly read).*

### A note on accessing the project .RMD file:
Users may also prefer to explore the project .RMD file and data files, rather than the .html output file. This gives the user more funcitonality than just the .html document, as the user is able to edit, read, run, and modify the project code and data within the R Studio environment. However, because running these scripts will require the source data .csv files, which are read into the script from path-specific project folders included in this project directory, it is recommended to do so by creating a 'fork' of this repository (instructions available from: https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/quickstart/fork-a-repo) rather than just simply downloading the .RMD file. Before attempting to fork this repository, we reccomend users ensure they have R (available from: https://www.r-project.org/), R Studio (available from: https://www.rstudio.com/products/rstudio/download/), and Git (available from: https://git-scm.com/downloads) installed. These applications are open source and are freely available to all individual users. 



*Please contact tpettit3@uwo.ca for any questions or concerns about this project and repository*.
